Shakespeare Oracle Verses

To swim, to dive into the fire, to ride
On the curled clouds,
Whose speechless song being many, seems one.

Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth,
Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish.

Be collected:
No more amazement: tell your piteous heart
Thou art thy mother's glass, and she in thee.

So, ere you find where light in darkness lies,
Gentle breath of yours my sails must fill.

Grant, if thou wilt, thou art beloved of many,
Both in your form and nobleness of mind.
    
Now my charms are all o'erthrown,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy.

Look, whom she best endow'd she gave thee more;
Our fancies are more giddy and unfirm.
    
Sap checked with frost and lusty leaves quite gone,
Courage and hope both teaching him the practice.

Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
I'll kneel down, and ask of thee forgiveness.

Hourly joys be still upon you!
And frame your mind to mirth and merriment. 

The moon new-bent in heaven, shall behold the night
That has such people in't!

And having climb'd the steep-up heavenly hill,
Fortune, good night: smile once more: turn thy wheel!
    
Beauty o'ersnow'd and bareness every where 
Thaws and resolves itself into a dew.

Their eyes do offices of truth, their words are natural breath, 
all dedicated to closeness and the bettering of my mind.

Sound me from my lowest note to the top of my compass
My heart is true as steel.

Thy self thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel:
I am sure care’s an enemy to life.

Sermons in stones, and good in everything.
And therefore sit you down in gentleness.
    
Have more than thou showest, 
Speak less than thou knowest,
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st.

What seest thou else
In the dark backward and abysm of time?
So full of shapes is fancy
That it alone is high fantastical.
    
To give away yourself, keeps yourself still,
Make me a willow cabin at your gate.

Those be rubies, fairy favors.
They sparkle still the right Promethean fire.
    
Men must endure their going hence, even as their coming hither;
I am a fool to weep at what I am glad of.

Get thee to a nunnery:
A contract of true love to celebrate.

If music be the food of love, play on,
And let this world no longer be a stage.

A man may see how this world goes with no eyes. Look with thine ears:
The murmuring surge, that on th' unnumber'd idle pebbles chafes.

And manifest experience had collected
Of drops that sacred pity hath engend'red.

How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world,
Merrily, merrily, shall I live now.

These our actors,
As I foretold you, were all spirits and
Do make me give the lie to my true sight.
    
With the help of your good hands.
All things in common nature should produce
Without sweat or endeavour.

And some donation freely to estate
Under the blossom that hangs on the bough.

Sounds and sweet airs, that give delight and hurt not
In a cowslip's bell I lie.

But that the dread of something after death,
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven. 

And ye that on the sands with printless foot do chase the ebbing Neptune,
O, let me see thee walk. Thou dost not halt.
 
But, like a cloistress, she will veiled walk
Out of the jaws of death.

As there is sense in truth and truth in virtue,
Joy, gentle friends, joy and fresh days of love
Accompany your hearts!

For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
And kiss the lips of unacquainted change?

Often have you heard that told:
Wherefore are these things hid? wherefore have
these gifts a curtain before 'em?

And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
The hour's now come;
The very minute bids thee ope thine ear.

I am all the daughters of my father's house,
And all the brothers too.
O spirit of love! how quick and fresh art thou.

And enterprises of great pith and moment
Are melted into air, into thin air.

O, swear not by the moon, the inconstant moon,
If it be not now, yet it will come: the readiness is all.

And fearless minds climb soonest unto crowns
That show, contain and nourish all the world.

Youth's a stuff will not endure.
Out of that no hope what great hope have you!

And thus the native hue of resolution
Lies rich in virtue and unmingled.

Happiness courts thee in her best array 
And joy comes well in such a needy time.

Nature's bequest gives nothing but doth lend,
Thy truth, then, be thy dower.

Study is like the heaven's glorious sun,
Which touch'd the very virtue of compassion in thee.

Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath
That long have frown'd upon their enmity!

Give me your hands, if we be friends,
We are such stuff as dreams are made on.

And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence.
Herein lives wisdom, beauty and increase.

I must go seek some dewdrops here
It blesseth him that gives and him that takes.

I put you to the use of your own virtues.
All things are ready, if our minds be so.

Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
Against the stormy gusts of winter's day.

Let gentleness my strong enforcement be
To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.

To take arms against a sea of troubles,
And by opposing end them?
Let it not enter in your mind of love.

These most brisk and giddy-paced times:
Is man no more than this? Consider him well.

Who with thy saffron wings upon my flowers
Calls back the lovely April of her prime:
The form of my intent. 

It is a wise father that knows his own child.
Like to a double cherry, seeming parted,
But yet an union in partition.

In action how like an angel! In apprehension how like a god!
That the rude sea grew civil at her song.

Gaze where you should, and that will clear your sight,
Enrich the time to come with smooth-fac'd peace.

The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune;
These blessed candles of the night.

O, from what power hast thou this powerful might,
By chance or nature's changing course untrimm'd?

Rise from the ground like feathered Mercury,
Then to the elements be free, and fare thou well!

The constancy and virtue of your love—
Diffusest honey-drops, refreshing showers.

For never-resting time leads summer on
The wheel is come full circle: I am here. 

But how is it that this lives in thy mind,
The undiscover'd country from whose bourn no traveller returns?

They are the books, the arts, the academes,
And I serve the fairy queen. 

Smooth runs the water where the brook is deep.
What stronger breastplate than a heart untainted?

Then wisely, good sir, weigh our sorrow with our comfort,
that ebb and flow by the moon.

All that glisters is not gold,
To plainness honour's bound when majesty falls to folly.

Think'st thou I'd make a life of jealousy?
The quality of mercy is not strain'd.

O heaven, O earth, bear witness to this sound,
As full of spirit as the month of May.

When I consider every thing that grows
Holds in perfection but a little moment,
Pray you, tread softly, that the blind mole may not
Hear a foot fall.

With gentle conference, soft and affable.
Let your indulgence set me free.

Light, seeking light, doth light of light beguile; 
Now let not Nature's hand keep the wild flood confin'd!

True, I talk of dreams, for there is nothing
Either good or bad, but thinking makes it so.
    
What's in a name? that which we call a rose
Being once display'd doth fall that very hour.

O, if you but knew how you the purpose cherish!
If all were minded so, the times should cease.

What is love? 'tis not hereafter;
And being frank she lends to those are free.

What's to come is still unsure: what's past is prologue, 
Present mirth hath present laughter.

And the moon changes even as your mind,
But thy eternal summer shall not fade.

I, thus neglecting worldly ends,
Play out the play.

Continue still in this so good a mind,
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest.

To forswear the full stream of the world
and to live in a nook merely monastic;
And by my body's action teach my mind.

Defer no time, delays have dangerous ends;
Thou shalt be as free as mountain winds.

Understanding begins to swell by prayer,
Which pierces so that it assaults
Mercy itself, and frees all faults.
 
As it is a spare life, look you, it fits my humour well;
With smiling plenty, and fair prosperous days!

Th' endeavour of this present breath may buy
The very lifeblood of our enterprise.

But I will tarry; the fool will stay,
And let the wise man fly:
To pay this debt of love but to a brother.

And now let's go hand in hand, not one before another,
Swifter than the moon's sphere.

Smiling at grief, awake, awake!
In delay there lies no plenty.

And then the moon, like to a silver bow
Upon the place beneath: it is twice blest.

And as the morning steals upon the night,
Consideration like an angel came.

When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
There's nothing ill can dwell in such a temple.

Be not afeard; the isle is full of noises,
To entrap the wisest.

Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud,
I would you would make use of that good wisdom.

Make the babbling gossip of the air cry out:
There are occasions and causes why and wherefore in all things.

Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove:
As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou growest.

For virtue and true beauty of the soul,
Halloo your name to the reverberate hills! 

But we in silence hold this virtue well:
The amity that wisdom knits not, folly may easily untie.

Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded, 
The better part of valour is discretion.

Draw the curtain close and let us all to meditation,
To pluck bright honour from the pale-fac'd moon.

My crown is call'd content;
A crown it is that seldom kings enjoy.
Silence bestows that virtue on it.

Time travels in divers paces with divers persons,
And, since I saw thee, th' affliction of my mind amends.

When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear,
These vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear.

Burden'd with like weight of pain,
Thou didst smile, infused with a fortitude from heaven.

This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
Was it not to refresh the mind of man?

So shaken as we are, so wan with care,
Awake, dear heart, awake; thou hast slept well; Awake.

Enforce attention like deep harmony.
You shall find your safety manifested.

Hath not in nature's mystery more science
To make the coming hour o'erflow with joy?

How hard it is to hide the sparks of nature!
Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful.

I will believe thou hast a mind that suits
And may enjoy such quiet walks as these.

Who doth ambition shun,
And loves to live i' th' sun,
He finds the joys of heaven here on earth.

Enjoy thy plainness;
It nothing ill becomes thee.
For 'tis the mind that makes the body rich.

Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?
Keep unshak'd that temple, thy fair mind.

Unlooked for joy in that I honour most;
Your bounty, virtue, fair humility.

Divert strong minds to the course of alt'ring things:
Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain.

For virtue's office never breaks men's troth,
Nor hath Love's mind of any judgment taste.

As Nature was in making graces dear,
Then happy I that love and am beloved.

You bear a gentle mind, and heav'nly blessings
Follow such creatures.
Steel thy fearful thoughts and change misdoubt to resolution.

Do not infest your mind with beating on
The strangeness of this business;
It is the purpose that makes strong the vow.

A turn or two I'll walk to still my beating mind.
My crown is in my heart, not on my head.

That love which virtue begs and virtue grants
Is true of mind and made of no such baseness.

Your patience and your virtue well deserves it.
That every eye which in this forest looks
Shall see thy virtue witness'd every where.

Cease, cease these jars and rest your minds in peace;
And take thou my oblation, poor but free.

To make you understand this in a manifested effect,
Now you are heir, therefore enjoy it now.

The purest spring is not so free from mud;
It is the show and seal of nature's truth.

Comets, importing change of times and states,
O infinite virtue, com'st thou smiling from
The world's great snare uncaught?

The very virtue of compassion in thee,
Shall change all griefs and quarrels into love.

You see how all conditions, how all minds
Tender down their services.
Silence is the perfectest herald of joy.

All of one nature, of one substance bred,
When inward joy enforc'd my heart to smile!

Who alone suffers suffers most i' th' mind,
Then music with her silver sound
With speedy help doth lend redress.

An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds
Whereof the root was fix'd in virtue's ground.

One feast, one house, one mutual happiness!
With profits of the mind, study and fast.
